= Syslinux Bootloader =

People probably don't know that {{Package|sys-boot/syslinux}} bootloader is good replacement to other "advanced" bootloaders such as Grub.

For sure syslinux is better maintained than Grub, so after long time of using Grub [[Alonbl|I]] switched.

Unlike Grub syslinux is well behaved bootloader and does not need any special requirement.

syslinux components:
* syslinux - FAT filesystem bootloader.
* extlinux - ext2 filesystem bootloader.
* pxelinux - network pxe bootloader.
* isolinux - ISO-9660 (cdrom) bootloader.

This manual should be kept simple for most of common usages (extlinux, syslinux), for advanced usages refer to upstream site or other pages.

== Installation ==

{{Root|emerge sys-boot/syslinux}}

{{Warning|Assuming /dev/sda1 is the boot partition, if not make the adjustments!}}

Install MBR:
{{Root|cat /usr/share/syslinux/mbr.bin > /dev/sda}}

Set boot partition as active:
{{Root|fdisk /dev/sda}}
{{Codeline|<pre>
Command (m for help): a
Partition number (1-4): 1
Command (m for help): w
</pre>}}

=== extlinux bootloader installation ===

{{Warning|Assuming /dev/sda1 is the boot partition, if not make the adjustments!}}

{{Root|mount /dev/sda1 /boot}}
{{Root|extlinux --install /boot}}
{{Root|umount /boot}}

=== syslinux bootloader installation ===

{{Note|Most probably you don't need to use FAT filesystem these days, consider ext2 filesystem for your boot partition}}

{{Warning|Assuming /dev/sda1 is the boot partition, if not make the adjustments!}}

{{Root|mount /dev/sda1 /boot}}
{{Root|syslinux --install /dev/sda1}}
{{Root|umount /boot}}

=== pxelinux bootloader installation ==

TODO

== Configuration ==

Configuration file varies between bootloaders:
* syslinux - syslinux.cfg
* extlinux - extlinux.conf
* isolinux - isolinux.cfg

The configuration format is the same.

=== Simple configuration ===

{{File|extlinux.conf|<pre>
LABEL x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1
KERNEL kernel-x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1
INITRD initramfs-x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1
APPEND real_root=/dev/sda3
</pre>}}

=== Menu configuration ===

The following configuration provides a simple text menu example.

This is done via the vesamenu module, in some cases where vesa is not compatible, the simpler menu module will work.

Logic:
# Do not wait for user interaction and select the "menu" configuration.
# The "menu" configuration entry actually loads the "vesamenu.c32" module.
# The vesamenu module reads the same configuration file, but now present entries as menu entries.
# The "menu" entry will be hidden.
# After 3 seconds (3*10=30) The default x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1 entry will be selected.

Copy the VESA menu module into the boot filesystem.
{{Root|cp /usr/share/syslinux/vesamenu.c32 /boot}}

{{File|extlinux.conf|<pre>
PROMPT 0
DEFAULT menu

TIMEOUT 30
ONTIMEOUT x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1

MENU TITLE Boot

LABEL x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1
KERNEL kernel-x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1
INITRD initramfs-x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo-r1
APPEND real_root=/dev/sda3

LABEL x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo
KERNEL kernel-x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo
INITRD initramfs-x86_64-3.1.0-gentoo
APPEND real_root=/dev/sda3

LABEL menu
MENU HIDE
KERNEL vesamenu.c32
</pre>}}

== Maintainer ==

[[User:Alonbl|Alon Bar-Lev]]

{{AuthorList|{{Author|Alon Bar-Lev|2011-11-17|type=original}}}}

[[Category:Boot]]