= Alon Bar-Lev's Gentoo Workstation =

I maintain a complex development workstation, there is some value in documenting it for other people to take what they like.

As a base, I use [[User:Alonbl/Gentoo_Bootstrap|Bootstrap]] and [[User:Alonbl/Gentoo_Configuration_Common|Gentoo Configuration]].

== Kernel ==

I use [[User:Alonbl/Linux_Configuration_Common|minimal]] module (when possible) kernel with {{Package|media-gfx/splashutils}}.
I use [[Fbsplash|splashutils]] because it makes the acceptance of Linux better for people that experiencing it at first.

Device specific configuration can be found at any of my [[User:Alonbl/Index#Hardware|hardware article]].

To compile kernel, I use [http://alon.barlev.googlepages.com genkernel-utils] which uses genkernel and ease
[[Linux_Disk_Encryption_Using_LoopAES_And_SmartCards|disk encryption]] initramfs configuration, and allow stable
and none stable configuration to co-exist.

== Hardware ==

See [[User:Alonbl/Index#Hardware|hardware articles]].

== Networking ==

I integrate networking as much as I can with OpenRC.

The following articles document my configuration:
* [[openresolv]]
* [[Stealth_DHCP]]
* [[Firewall_Using_Firehol]]
* [[OpenVPN_Non_Root]]
* [[VM_Tap_Networking]]
* [[PPP_Client]]
* [[PPPoE_Client]]

Workstation is a complete network:


             +-----------------------------------------------+
             |                    INTERNET                   |
             +-----------------------------------------------+
               ^          ^          ^          ^          ^
               |          |          |          |          |
               |          |          |          |          |
               |          |          |          |          |
            GSM modem  Broadband   GSM modem  wired     wireless
               |          |          |          |          |
              ppp0       ppp1       ppp2       eth0       wlan0
               |          |          |          |          |
             +-----------------------------------------------+
             |               \\ | //                 \\ | // |
             |                 NAT     WORKSTATION     NAT   |
             |                    ^                      ^   |
             |  /-----NAT--<-----\ \                      \  |
             +-----------------------------------------------+
               |                     |                     |
              vpn0                  br0                   usb0
               |                     |                     |
               |                +----+----+                |
               |                |         |                |
               V               vm0       vm1               V
             OFFICE             |         |             EMBEDDED
                              QEMU1     QEMU2

In words, workstation connects to the Internet via multiple coice of interfaces. It also provides
access to the Internet for embedded devices and virtual machines via NAT. DHCP is made using special
[[Stealth_DHCP|mode]] which hides computer indentity from DHCP server.

The virtual machines resides in their [[VM_Tap_Networking|own segment]] interacting with workstaion via br0 interface.

There is also VPN using [[OpenVPN_Non_Root|OpenVPN non root mode]] to office network, virtual machines can access this network via NAT.

All interfaces are protected by [[Firewall_Using_Firehol|firewall]].

To enable user wpa_supplicant access, I use the following:
{{File|/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf|<pre>
ctrl_interface=DIR=/var/run/wpa_supplicant GROUP=myusers
</pre>}}

As usually only wireless networking is working, we would like to switch off the wired and boardband interfaces, set the following:
{{File|/etc/rc.conf|<pre>
rc_hotplug="!net.eth0 !net.ppp0"
</pre>}}

== Security ==

On most of my mobile devices I [[Linux_Disk_Encryption_Using_LoopAES_And_SmartCards|encrypt]] the disk
using {{Package|sys-fs/loop-aes}} which is the most strong and fast cryptographic method I found. I use
{{Package|dev-libs/opensc}} compliant smartcard with CCID compliant reader using {{Package|dev-libs/openct}}.

I do not use {{Package|sys-apps/pcsc-lite}} as it is too complex, consume power as it busy loops, and does
not run in least privileged mode.

I use [[Firewall_Using_Firehol|firewall]] for all of my interfaces, with outgoing and incoming traffic rules.

To avoid man-in-the-middle attacks on portage synchronization, I always use [[Secured_Portage_Sync|signed snapshots]].

== Power Management ==

I use [[Userspace_software_suspend|Usermode suspend]], with {{Package|sys-power/hibernate-script}} as wrapper, and
{{Package|sys-power/acpid}} as event managemet.

[[USB_Power_Saving|USB power]] down extends battery life, as long as it works, I use it.

== Gentoo Configuration ==

Based on [[User:Alonbl/Gentoo_Configuration_Common|Gentoo common configuration]].

{{File|/etc/make.conf|<pre>
USE="${USE} bluetooth alsa joystick"
USE="${USE} kde qt4 plasma X xv xinerama opengl"
USE="${USE} jpeg jpeg2k tiff png svg"
USE="${USE} mp3 ogg vorbis mpeg"
USE="${USE} bidi"
USE="${USE} lzma"
USE="${USE} samba kerberos logrotate vim-syntax"

INPUT_DEVICES="evdev"
VIDEO_CARDS="intel"
LINGUAS="en he"

PORTDIR_OVERLAY="/usr/local/portage/local /usr/local/portage/alon-barlev-portage ${PORTDIR_OVERLAY}"
</pre>}}

{{File|/etc/make.profile|<pre>
->../var/gentoo/portage/profiles/default/linux/amd64/10.0/no-multilib
</pre>}}

Licenses: [[User:Alonbl/Gentoo_Licensing]]

=== Important USE flags ===

{{File|/etc/portage/package.use/my-system.conf|<pre>
app-laptop/tp_smapi hdaps
app-crypt/aespipe static
sys-apps/loop-aes-losetup static
dev-libs/opensc -pcsc-lite openct doc
dev-libs/pkcs11-helper doc
media-gfx/splashutils mng fbcondecor
sys-apps/hal -crypt
sys-fs/loop-aes keyscrub
sys-fs/ntfsprogs -crypt
sys-power/suspend fbsplash -crypt threads
sys-auth/pambase consolekit # kde
sys-auth/pambase -kerberos
sys-apps/portage python3
</pre>}}

{{File|/etc/portage/package.use/my-applications|<pre>
app-cdr/k3b ffmpeg dvd encode mad lame
app-text/poppler cairo # gimp
media-gfx/gimp gimpprint svg wmf pdf
app-office/libreoffice java
media-video/transcode a52 aac dvd
virtual/ffmpeg encode
media-video/ffmpeg aac a52 dts v4l xvid
media-video/vlc dbus ffmpeg aac a52 aalib taglib v4l truetype cdda cddax cddb cdio dvd encode rtsp live ogmusepack wma-fixed flac x264
media-gfx/ufraw exif lensfun hotpixels contrast gtk gimp
www-client/firefox libnotify system-sqlite
dev-db/sqlite secure-delete unlock-notify # firefox
x11-drivers/xf86-video-intel sna
</pre>}}

{{File|/etc/portage/package.use/my-network.conf|<pre>
net-misc/openssh -ldap X509
net-misc/openvpn iproute2 pkcs11
net-print/cups ppds
net-analyzer/wireshark gtk
net-dialup/rp-pppoe -X
net-fs/samba ads ldap
</pre>}}

=== Always none stable ===

 sys-kernel/gentoo-sources ~amd64
 sys-kernel/genkernel ~amd64          # I use recent kernel
 app-emulation/qemu-kvm ~amd64        # I use recent kernel
 media-gfx/splashutils ~amd64         # I use recent kernel
 sys-fs/loop-aes ~amd64               # I use recent kernel
 x11-drivers/xf86-video-intel ~amd64  # so far acceleration is not right

== Localization ==

[[Hebrew]].

== udev ==

Until https://bugs.launchpad.net/qemu/+bug/891625 resolved:

{{File|/etc/udev/rules.d/60-kvm.rules|<pre>
KERNEL=="vhost-net",GROUP="kvm"
</pre>}}

== Desktop ==

=== X11 ===

I use only evdev input driver, without HAL or any other automation.

{{File|/etc/X11/xorg.conf|<pre>
Section "dri"
        Group           0
        Mode            0666
EndSection

Section "ServerLayout"
        Identifier     "Default"
        Screen      0  "Screen0" 0 0
        InputDevice    "Mouse0" "CorePointer"
        InputDevice    "Keyboard0" "CoreKeyboard"
EndSection

Section "ServerFlags"
        Option  "blank time"    "10"    # 10 minutes
        Option  "standby time"  "20"
        Option  "suspend time"  "30"
        Option  "off time"      "60"

#       Option  "Xinerama"      "on"

        Option  "DefaultServerLayout"   "Default"

        # xorg.bug#17925
        Option  "AutoAddDevices"        "false"
EndSection

Section "Extensions"
        Option          "Composite"     "Enable"
EndSection

Section "InputDevice"
        Identifier      "Keyboard0"
        Driver          "evdev"
        Option          "Device"        "/dev/input/by-path/platform-i8042-serio-0-event-kbd"
EndSection

Section "InputDevice"
        Identifier      "Mouse0"
        Driver          "evdev"
        Option          "Device"        "/dev/input/by-path/platform-i8042-serio-2-event-mouse"

        # Require for scroll
        Option          "Buttons"               "3"
        Option          "EmulateWheel"
        Option          "EmulateWheelButton"    "2"
EndSection

Section "Monitor"
        Identifier   "Monitor0"
EndSection

Section "Device"
        Identifier  "Card0"
        Driver      "intel"
        VendorName  "Intel Corporation"
        BoardName   "Mobile 4 Series Chipset Integrated Graphics Controller"
        BusID       "PCI:0:2:0"
EndSection

Section "Screen"
        Identifier "Screen0"
        Device     "Card0"
        Monitor    "Monitor0"

        # the following enables setting 2nd screen
        # on left/right top/bottom using xrandr.
        SubSection "Display"
                Viewport   0 0
                Depth     24
                Virtual         4000 4000
        EndSubSection
EndSection
</pre>}}

=== KDE ===

I use KDE as my desktop, why? I do not understand gnome, and Qt looks right, including proper [[Hebrew]] support.

I use the following packages:
 kde-base/kdebase-startkde
 kde-base/ark
 kde-base/dolphin
 kde-base/kfind
 kde-base/kate
 kde-base/kcalc
 kde-base/kcharselect
 kde-base/kde-l10n
 kde-base/kdesdk-kioslaves
 kde-base/kdm
 kde-base/kget
 kde-base/kmenuedit
 kde-base/kmix
 kde-base/kolourpaint
 kde-base/konqueror
 kde-base/konsole
 kde-base/kscreensaver
 kde-base/ksnapshot
 kde-base/okular
 kde-base/kopete
 media-libs/phonon-vlc
 net-misc/knemo

{{File|/etc/portage/package.use/kde.conf|<pre>
kde-base/kwin xcomposite
kde-base/kdelibs spell udisks
kde-base/krdc vnc
media-libs/phonon vlc
x11-libs/qt-opengl qt3support
x11-libs/qt-declarative qt3support
x11-libs/qt-gui qt3support dbus mng # bluetooth
x11-libs/qt-sql qt3support
x11-libs/qt-core qt3support
sys-block/parted device-mapper # kde
sys-auth/consolekit policykit # kde
</pre>}}

To enable gtk+ (firefox, gimp, wireshark...) integration to Qt:

{{Root|emerge x11-themes/oxygen-gtk}}

{{File|~/.gtkrc-2.0|<pre>
include "/usr/share/themes/oxygen-gtk/gtk-2.0/gtkrc"
style "user-font"
{
        font_name="Sans Serif"
}
widget_class "*" style "user-font"

gtk-theme-name="oxygen-gtk"
gtk-font-name="Sans Serif 8"
</pre>}}

{{Command|ln -s .gtkrc-2.0 ~/.gtkrc-2.0-kde}}

== Qemu ==

I use kvm

{{File|/etc/conf.d/modules|<pre>
modules="${modules} kvm-intel vhost-net"
</pre>}}

{{File|q|<pre>
#!/bin/sh

export SPICE_DEBUG_ALLOW_MC=1
qemu-system-x86_64 \
        -no-quit \
        -drive file=disk1.img \
        -net nic -net tap,ifname=vm0,script=/bin/true,vhost=on \
        -m 512 \
        -monitor tcp:127.0.0.1:4445,server,nowait \
        -localtime \
        -usbdevice tablet \
        -spice port=4446,disable-ticketing \
        -vnc 127.0.0.1:0
</pre>}}

== Maintainer ==

[[User:Alonbl|Alon Bar-Lev]]

{{AuthorList|{{Author|Alon Bar-Lev|2011-12-02|type=original}}}}