
IBM Thinkpad mobile computers were always a great choice for Linux users. The BIOS and peripheral were supported due to IBM discloser of hardware specs.

Thinkpad BIOS was always compatible for suspend to ram and and suspend to disk.

Thinkpad ACPI module translated events read from NVRAM to actual ACPI events (such as dock, lid and button events). The NVRAM is a special device that
can be used in order to read the state of the special Thinkpad keys. It is not event driven, so it must be pulled by
the Thinkpad ACPI module.

HDAPS (Hard disk protection system) is a feature of Thinkpad that senses movements, and may use in order to park disks in order to keep them safe.

Recently also TPM chip was added, it is standard 1.2 TPM device and may be used by TPM enabled software.

== Kernel ==

Typical Thinkpad specific configuration:

{{Kernel||<pre>
  Power management and ACPI options  --->
    [*] Suspend to RAM and standby
    [*] Hibernation (aka 'suspend to disk')
    [*] Run-time PM core functionality
    [*] ACPI (Advanced Configuration and Power Interface) Support  --->
      <M>   AC Adapter
      <M>   Battery
      -*-   Button
      -*-   Video
      <M>   Fan
      [*]   Dock
      <M>   Processor
      <M>   Thermal Zone
    CPU Frequency scaling  --->
      [*] CPU Frequency scaling
      <M>   CPU frequency translation statistics
      [*]     CPU frequency translation statistics details
      Default CPUFreq governor (performance)  --->
      -*-   'performance' governor
      <M>   'powersave' governor
      <M>   'userspace' governor for userspace frequency scaling
      <M>   'ondemand' cpufreq policy governor
      <M>   'conservative' cpufreq governor
      x86 CPU frequency scaling drivers  --->
        <M> ACPI Processor P-States drivers
    -*- CPU idle PM support
    [*]   Cpuidle Driver for Intel Processors
  Device Drivers  --->
    Character devices  --->
      <M> TPM Hardware Support  --->
        <M>   TPM Interface Specification 1.2 Interface
    [*] X86 Platform Specific Device Drivers  --->
      <M>   ThinkPad ACPI Laptop Extras 
      [*]     Console audio control ALSA interface
      [*]     Allow control of important LEDs (unsafe)
      [*]     Video output control support
      [*]     Support NVRAM polling for hot keys
</pre>}}

{{File|/etc/conf.d/modules|<pre>
modules="${modules} thinkpad_acpi"

modules="${modules}
ac
battery
fan
processor
thermal
coretemp
"

modules="${modules}
acpi-cpufreq
cpufreq-conservative
cpufreq-ondemand
cpufreq-powersave
"</pre>}}

== Misc ==

=== X11 ===

To use scroll add the following to your mouse section:

{{File|/etc/X11/xorg.conf|<pre>
        Option          "Buttons"               "3"
        Option          "EmulateWheel"
        Option          "EmulateWheelButton"    "2"
</pre>}}

=== hdaps ===

{{File|/etc/portage/package.use/thinkpad.conf|<pre>
app-laptop/tp_smapi hdaps
</pre>}}

{{Root|emerge app-laptop/tp_smapi app-laptop/hdapsd}}

Until {{Bug|392475}} resolved, add at end:
{{File|/etc/conf.d/hdapsd|<pre>
OPTIONS="${OPTIONS} -l"
</pre>}}

{{Root|rc-update add hdapsd default}}
{{Root|/etc/init.d/hdapsd start}}

==== KDE widget ====

{{Root|emerge hdaps_monitor}}

Add HDPS widget to tray.

=== TPM ===

TODO

== Maintainer ==

[[User:Alonbl|Alon Bar-Lev]]

{{AuthorList|{{Author|Alon Bar-Lev|2011-11-25|type=original}}}}

[[Category:Lenovo_Laptops]]