= Non Root Xorg-Server =

For some starange reason, xorg-server developers do not perform this final step toward non root xorg-server, although kernel and all other components are ready.

The gap is very small, and is opurtunity for all that do not like unneeded root complex processes running on their system.

== Patches ==

{{File|xorg-server-1.11.2-none-root.patch|<pre>
diff --git a/hw/xfree86/os-support/linux/lnx_video.c b/hw/xfree86/os-support/linux/lnx_video.c
index 3d45511..98bbad8 100644
--- a/hw/xfree86/os-support/linux/lnx_video.c
+++ b/hw/xfree86/os-support/linux/lnx_video.c
@@ -501,6 +501,9 @@ xf86EnableIO(void)
        if (ExtendedEnabled)
                return TRUE;

+       if (getenv("XORGSERVER_NONE_ROOT") != NULL)
+               return TRUE;
+
 #if defined(__powerpc__)
        ioBase_phys = syscall(__NR_pciconfig_iobase, 2, 0, 0);
</pre>}}


{{File|xorg-server-1.11.2-r2.ebuild|<pre>
--- xorg-server-1.11.2-r2.ebuild        2011-12-27 23:01:29.000000000 +0200
+++ xorg-server-1.11.2-r2.ebuild        2012-01-10 23:48:08.372447095 +0200
@@ -111,6 +111,7 @@ PATCHES=(
        "${UPSTREAMED_PATCHES[@]}"
        "${FILESDIR}"/${PN}-disable-acpi.patch
        "${FILESDIR}"/${PN}-1.9-nouveau-default.patch
+       "${FILESDIR}"/${PN}-1.11.2-none-root.patch
 )

 pkg_pretend() {
@@ -151,7 +153,7 @@ pkg_setup() {
                $(use_with doc xmlto)
                --sysconfdir=/etc/X11
                --localstatedir=/var
-               --enable-install-setuid
+               --disable-install-setuid
                --with-fontrootdir=/usr/share/fonts
                --with-xkb-output=/var/lib/xkb
                --disable-config-hal
</pre>}}


'''Optional:''' If you intend to run multiple instances of Xorg, the following kernel patch is required:

{{File|4200-drm-non-root.patch|<pre>
--- a/drivers/gpu/drm/drm_drv.c 2012-01-11 21:10:48.238484914 +0200
+++ b/drivers/gpu/drm/drm_drv.c 2012-01-11 21:11:25.429450927 +0200
@@ -82,8 +82,8 @@ static struct drm_ioctl_desc drm_ioctls[
        DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_SET_SAREA_CTX, drm_setsareactx, DRM_AUTH|DRM_MASTER|DRM_ROOT_ONLY),
        DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_GET_SAREA_CTX, drm_getsareactx, DRM_AUTH),
 
-       DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_SET_MASTER, drm_setmaster_ioctl, DRM_ROOT_ONLY),
-       DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_DROP_MASTER, drm_dropmaster_ioctl, DRM_ROOT_ONLY),
+       DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_SET_MASTER, drm_setmaster_ioctl, 0),
+       DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_DROP_MASTER, drm_dropmaster_ioctl, 0),
 
        DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_ADD_CTX, drm_addctx, DRM_AUTH|DRM_ROOT_ONLY),
        DRM_IOCTL_DEF(DRM_IOCTL_RM_CTX, drm_rmctx, DRM_AUTH|DRM_MASTER|DRM_ROOT_ONLY),
</pre>}}

== Scripts ==

The following is needed in order to startx in none previliged mode.

{{File|/usr/local/bin/my-startx|<pre>
#!/bin/sh

display="$1"

sudo my-startx-perm "${display}" &
PPP="$!"
sleep 1
XORGSERVER_NONE_ROOT=1 setsid startx -- ${display} -logfile /tmp/xorg.$$.log &
sleep 5

exec kill -9 "${PPID}" # exit current shell
</pre>}}

The following is needed to temporary fix privileges of ttys, not sure why xorg-server is using tty0, and why -novtswitch is not working.

{{File|/usr/local/bin/mystartx-perm|<pre>
#!/bin/sh

die() {
        local m="$1"
        echo "FATAL: ${m}" >&2
        exit 1
}

change() {
        local user="$1"
        chown "${user}" /dev/tty0 "${tty}" #/dev/input/event*
}

display="$1"

case "${display}" in
        :[0-4])
                index="${display#:}"
        ;;
        *)
                index="0"
        ;;
esac

while killall -q -0 "$0"; do
        sleep 1
done

tty="/dev/tty$((7+${index}))"

cleanup() {
        change root
}

trap cleanup 0

[ "$(stat --printf="%u\n" "${tty}")" = 0 ] || die "invalid init perm"
change "${SUDO_USER}"
sleep 5

exit 0
</pre>}}

Enable execute the my-startx-perm using sudo.

{{File|/etc/sudoers.d/xorg-server|<pre>
ALL ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/local/bin/my-startx-perm
</pre>}}

Enable access to input devices, there must be a better way to do this, enabling this allows any application to tap keyboard/mouse.

{{File|/etc/udev/rules.d/60-xorg-server.rules|<pre>
SUBSYSTEM=="input",MODE="0666"
</pre>}}

Add:
 Option "GrabDevice" "True"

To your input devices so nobody can tap the active devices.

== Test ==

Create ~/.xorg.conf with relevant contents.

As root:
{{Root|/etc/init.d/xdm stop}}

As user:
{{Command|my-startx}}

== Maintainer ==

[[User:Alonbl|Alon Bar-Lev]]

[[Category:Security]]
[[Category:Desktop Environment]]
{{AuthorList|{{Author|Alon Bar-Lev|2012-01-11|type=original}}}}